A NEW ESSAY ON THE SMALL-POX. With a view to preserve this nation from the infection of that distemper

Every Person is sensible, how fatal the Disease I insist on, hath been these late Years; and perhaps there is not a Family in the Kingdom, that laments not the Spoils of it; which is sufficient to justify every honest Attempt, to free the Publick from such a Calamity.

I shall not enter into the Dispute about Inoculation, which is now on the Carpet; by reason what I have in my Views, is the superseding any Occasion for that Operation; which, if it could be obtain'd, must, on many Accounts, be preferr'd to the general Practice of it; and render it more safe in the few Instances, wherein, after all, it may be esteem'd proper.

In order to introduce this Proposal, I think it necessary to observe what gave me the first Hint, and is the real Foundation of it; viz. That the Distemper it self is both of a Foreign Extract, and of a late Origin. There are some Parts of the World entirely unacquainted with it at this Day; and we are assur'd, one Quarter of it (viz. America) was so, till the Spaniards subdued it; when, by the Infection of a Negro, this cruel Disease spread it self among the Natives, and hath now almost extirpated great and populous Clans.

The old Greek and Latin Physicians had no Idea of this Disorder; For we have the 

first Descriptions of it from the Arabian Writers. I confess, we read of Eruptions in Fevers; and have Reason to think these obtain'd in ancient Time. I know not whether what we term the Chicken-Pox, may not be a proper critical Secretion of some Humours in Children; for they often affect them, without any previous Contagion, and are attended with no ill Consequence. But the Moors and Arabs (who, every Person knows, by their sordid, nasty way of Living, in a hot Climate, have turn'd common Fevers into Plagues;) have perhaps, in the same manner, given that malignant, contagious Efficacy, to those Mild and Natural Pustules.

From this Account of the Case, it must evidently follow, that the Distemper I now treat of, is One Species of a Plague; and therefore both may, and ought, in the same Manner, to be extirpated from the Nation.

The late Experiments of Inoculating it, confirm this Account; and, at the same Time, sufficiently demonstrate, how small a Seed, 

less than the Hundredth Part of a Grain, will produce a very plentiful Crop. It's true, this may differ very much, in regard of the Soil; which is a Consideration, in Favour of a Practice, that allows us a convenient Opportunity to prepare the Body, and to adjust both the Quantity and Situation of the Particles, that are thrown into it. But why shou'd we generally cultivate after this manner an Eastern Plant, that hath made such dreadful Havock among us? Especially since there is so much Reason to question, whether we could promise our selves that Success, if it were universally in Use: For, the Contagion must increase in Proportion to the Subjects; whereas, on the other hand, when the Disease hath left us, the few who (on the Account of Travelling, or Physick) may have leave to go through the Operation, will run less Hazard in it.

I confess, there will be a Difficulty in overcoming popular Prejudices, in Favour of these Disorders. They esteem them sent of God, for the Sins of Mankind; which is a pious Account of all our Afflictions. But when this Representation discourages the proper 

Endeavours to remove them; it hath generally been esteem'd, in other Cases, a criminal Abuse of the Doctrine. This is perfectly the Case in Turkey; where, for that Reason, their great Towns are no more free from the Plague, than ours are from the Small-Pox. But I have the Pleasure to observe, that the Articles of the Church of England prudently caution us against this Construction of the Sentence of Predestinanation; which, for Curious and Carnal Persons to have before their Eyes, is there said to be, a great Downfall. But I leave the Management of this Argument to our Divines.

When our People are well reconcil'd to the Religion of the Thing, there can, perhaps, be nothing more easy or safe, than to deliver us from the Infection. For, the Substance of my Proposal is but, in short,
To take the Method, that was insisted on as necessary to deliver us from the Plague, if it had been imported among us; as we apprehended it might, from Marseilles.

The Thing is then so far done, that I have Reason to hope, and say, A few Generations hence would enquire, what Sort of Distemper their Ancestors intended, by the Name of the Small-Pox? And when so great an Advantage may be procur'd by it; there can be nothing unkind, or difficult, only in obliging the Attendants and Physicians, where the Small-Pox are, to perform a Sort of Quarantain; to bury the Furniture, and purify the Houses; which is all that will be requir'd, and to which they will have sufficient Inducement to consent, if the Loss they sustain by it, is but supported by the Publick. I know not whether an Office of Insurance might not be establish'd for that Purpose: But this will be the Care of the Legislature, if our Physicians do but come into the Scheme: They are the only Persons that will suffer, in a profitable Branch of their Practice. But whatever some impudent Quacks may have in their View, I have the Assurance to say, The Gentlemen of the Faculty, upon the Principles of the New Philosophy, and the best Experience, will esteem this Proposal worthy their Consideration. They know very well, that when the Eruption is compleated, 

and the putrid Particles have fix'd on the Lungs, and vital Parts, the Event must be left to Nature; for there is little Room for the Exercise of the best Skill: And upon that Account, they must be pleas'd with an Expedient, that will secure their Art from the Tryals, that are vain in themselves, and often fatal to their Reputation. As for the Scandal of our Profession, the Men who have no Comfort but in Filth and Ordure, and are only Caterers for the Worms; I am not asham'd to confess, I have shew'd no regard to their mercenary Ends.

It is to the very Learned and Worthy-Body, I submit this Proposal; who will, I am persuaded, at least honourably treat a Plan, that is form'd upon the Practice of some of the Ancient Physicians, the Fathers and first Ornaments of this Science; who did not only consult particular Cases, but deliver'd whole Nations at once from Plagues. If the Method I have suggested appears to them as well calculated for this Purpose, as it's honestly design'd; I have no Reason to doubt the Approbation of Persons of such a generous and genteel 

Education, and whose Business is the Health of the People.

I know, the Fate of this Scheme will depend on their Representation of it; and therefore, by reason The Royal College of Physicians are best qualify'd to direct the Execution, I have not presum'd to offer the particular Rules that must be observ'd, and that will require the Sanction of the Legislature: It is what, I do not doubt, they will favour their Country with, if this Proposal is so happy as to come recommended by them.

His Most Sacred Majesty, whom God long preserve; and Their Royal Highnesses, tho' they are now in no pain for the Princes, the young Hopes and Joys of these Realms; They have too much Regard for their People, not to encourage every Thing that may make them Happy and Healthful.

And I hope our Nobility and Gentry will esteem it too much a common Interest, to neglect this Proposal, if there is a Prospect (as, I think, there is a very good one) in this Way of being secure from this Distemper, 

and, at the same Time, from a Train of Evils and Ulcers, that generally attend the worst Sort of it. For why shou'd we cherish the cruel Brood of Africa or Asia in our Bowels, that have made those frightful Ravages among us, and entail this Poison on our Posterity, that was, perhaps, the Import of our Holy Wars in former Days?

How great must be the Happiness to observe the new Scenes arise, when a noisome Plague shall cease to change our Countenances, and send us away, or to make us a Terror to our selves and others! How desirable would it be, no more (unless by the special Commission of Heaven) to feel any of the Fury of it, filling our Graves, or spoiling our Features? We shou'd not then so frequently meet the dismal Scars, and indelible Characters, it hath left on almost every Face: But Britain, no longer inhabited by these Sort of Picts, would become Fair Albion once again.

Then, to use the sacred Stile, may our Sons be as Plants grown up in their Youth; they will always carry their first Bloom; and our Daughters as Corner-stones, polish'd after the similitude 

of a Palace; or, in our Language, more smooth and sparkling than the best-wrought Marble. Then would all the Domestick Virtues flourish: The Beautiful Mothers, secure of the Affection of their Husbands, wou'd convey the healthy Treasure to their Offspring: The Ladies wou'd shine in our Assemblies; and the Gentlemen soften, under their Influence, into every Virtue. Let future Ages tell the rest with Joy!

Full of this Project, I can't forbear imaging to my self the Acknowledgments of a whole Island; and every Person in it, contributing to make my Life easy and happy, who have in this Proposal studied to make theirs so.
