SEVERAL CASES in PHYSICK, And One in particular, giving an Account of A Person who was Inoculated for the Small-Pox, and had the Small-Pox upon the Inoculation, and yet had it again.

Together with two or three other very remarkable SMALL-POX Cases, &c.

To which is added, A LETTER to Dr. LEE, Giving him an Account of a Letter of Dr. FREIND'S concerning that Fever which infested the Army under the Conduct of the Earl of Peterborough, while he was Physician to it, Anno 1705, &c. in Spain: Together with the said LETTER.

By PEIRCE DOD, M. D. Fellow of the COLLEGE of PHYSICIANS, and Physician to St. Bartholomew's Hospital.

"Magnae sunt Progressiones, quae singulis fere saeculis, praestantes Ingenio viri, a se observata, in commune contulerunt?"—

Carolus Piso, Epistola Dedicator. ad Observationes suas de Colluvie serosa.

LONDON: Printed for C. DAVIS against Gray's-Inn Gate in Holborn, Printer to the Royal-Society. 1746.

THE PREFACE.

THE three first of the following Cases have already, in some measure, been communicated to the Publick, through the Candour of the Learned Gentleman to whom they are address'd.

It may be seemingly unnecessary therefore perhaps to publish them again: But as there is something in each of them which is very remarkable, and One of them in particular, seems to clear up a Point of considerable Consequence with respect to Inoculation, it cannot be amiss, I think, to give them a Chance at least, of being, if possible, a little more publick: Besides, there are several Additions to the two last of them since they were sent to the Royal Society.

Most of the other Cases are taken from some Adversaria, or Manuscript Notes, which I have, as well as an Account of several Diseases, both Acute and Chronical, in Manuscript likewise, 

of Dr. Browne's, Son of the famous Sir Thomas Browne, and who was himself likewise a Person of great Learning and Eminence, and Physician to St. Bartholomew's Hospital for upwards of six and twenty Years, and succeeded therein by Dr. Cade, in October, Anno Domini, 1708.

The first of them was communicated to him by one R. G. an Apothecary at the Bath, and the Minutes of it are said to have been taken from Mr. Long's own Mouth, as may be seen by the said R. G's Letter, dated July 11, 1692, and is by no means an inaccurate Relation. The three others, viz. Mr. Dormer's, Mr. Hales's, and the Marquis of Dorchester's, came directly within his own Observation, and have something in them which is very well worth Notice, as well as that brief Account of the Small-Pox, which is chiefly likewise taken from his Manuscript Papers.

There are but two Cases besides; One of them, of the same kind with That in the first Letter to Mr. Folkes, tho' not of the same fortunate Event: The other, taken from Tulpius, which I hope there is no occasion to make any Apology for, especially considering how apposite it seems to be to some of those Observations, which occurr'd 

to me upon Mr. Hales's Case, and to another Case of the Stone which has lately made a great deal of Noise in the World.

That Letter of Dr. Freind's to Dr. Cockburne, which is added after these Cases, is accounted for in the Epistle that precedes it: I have nothing further therefore, I think, to trouble the World with at present,


ERRATA.

Page 5. l. 18. after Syrup, read and — Page 8. l. 26. instead of affluente, read effluente — Page 24. l. 28. instead of Country, read Course — Page 37. l. 22. instead of Julep, read Jalap — Page 41. l. 3. after Age, add when — In Epistola ad Doctorem Lee, Page ult. l. 11. instead of ejusvis, read cujusvis — In Epistola Doctoris Freind, Page 51. l. 1. instead of litteras, read Literas.

AN Account of the several CASES.

    Bloody Urine in the Small-Pox, and yet the Patient recover'd. Page 1
    The Small-Pox cur'd by a very free Use of Strong Beer and Wine, and other Strong and Spirituous Liquors. Page 10
    A Person inoculated for the Small-Pox, had the Small-Pox upon the Inoculation, and yet had it again. Page 12
    The Way of curing Fevers in Tartary. Page 17
    Bloody Urine in the Small-Pox, and the Patient liv'd to the twentieth Day. Page 18
    The Secondary Fever in the Small-Pox, cur'd by the Use of the Bark. Page 24
    A thorough Decrepitacy from the Gout cur'd by the Bath, and drinking of Bath-Waters. Page 27
    Fifty grains of solid Opium taken through a Mistake. Page 31
    A Suppression of Urine from the Stone in the Kidneys, cur'd by a large Quantity of Soap. Page 37
    Mictus Calculorum effractorum. Page 42

CASE the FIRST. AN ACCOUNT OF A Person who made Bloody Water in the Course of the Small-Pox, and yet recover'd: In a LETTER to MARTIN FOLKES, Esq; PRESIDENT of the Royal Society.

SIR,

MAKING Bloody Water is universally esteem'd as terrible a Symptom as any that can happen in the Small-Pox, and all who have wrote concerning that Distemper do unanimously agree, that it is a certain Forerunner of approaching Death. Dr. Cade indeed says, in his Letter to Dr. Friend concerning Purging in that Distemper, that he has sometimes cur'd this Symptom by the help of Camphire, 

and a copious Quantity of Acids; but then he adds, that this Relief was only temporary, and that, to confess the Truth, he never knew any Body that made that sort of Water, who ever surviv'd the 16th Day from the Eruption, and there is no Body whom I know of, that has been conversant in this Distemper, but has constantly experienc'd, sooner or later, the like Fatality in consequence of it: I mean, when this sort of Urine has plainly proceeded from a broken Crasis or Contexture, or as it were a thorough Dissolution of the whole Mass of Blood: For I know very well you shall now and then have several Streaks, and sometimes larger Quantities of Blood, in the Urine, from the Acrimony of the Salts that are in Spanish Flies, upon the Application of Blisters, which are frequently ordered, and mostly likewise necessary, in one or other of the Stadia of this Distemper, and yet the Patient shall do well. And Dr. Browne, who was a very worthy Predecessor of mine in St. Bartholomew's Hospital, gives an Account of a Gentlewoman that liv'd in Dean's Yard, Westminster, who made bloody Urine in the Small-Pox, for four or five Days together, and that Dr. Needham, who attended her along with him, did, upon that account, forsake her, and yet she did well; but that they found afterwards, that this bloody Urine was not occasion'd by the Malignancy 

of the Distemper, but by a sharp Stone which was at that time descending from one of the Kidneys, through the Ureters, into the Bladder, and which she afterwards voided. This I have from some Adversaria of his, a good number of which I have had the fortune to be in possession of several Years, and among which there are likewise several other remarkable Cases that occurr'd to him during the course of a very long and extensive, as well as successful Practice.

But to return to my Subject.

It cannot but be a Satisfaction therefore, to a Person of your Humanity and Goodness, to hear of an Instance in which this frightful Symptom was not attended with its usual Fatality; and it was in the Case of a young Gentleman of about 16 Years of Age, Son to one Colonel Ellitson, a Gentleman of very considerable Fortune and Worth in Jamaica.

He was taken with a Fever and great Pain in his Head on April the 20th last, and had the Small-Pox come out upon him the Day following, notwithstanding which the same Symptoms still continued, and nothing almost would stay in his Stomach, and his Head likewise was very delirious: He was oblig'd therefore to be

blooded, and had Blisters applied to his Neck and to his Arms, which, together with a proper Quantity of Pulvis e chelis Cancror. comp. and Nitre, were the first Things that I had an Opportunity of ordering for him.

The next Day every thing was more quiet, and so again the third Day from the Eruption; but the Small-Pox were very numerous all over him, and of a rank angry Sort, as they generally are, I think, in most of your West-India Constitutions; but this young Gentleman had besides overheated himself a little before, upon acting his Part among the rest of his School-Fellows, at the Montum near Eaton.

Things continued in the same State the fourth Day, but towards the Evening there were a few Streaks of Blood mix'd with, and subsiding in his Water, which did not much alarm me, because I did not know but it might be caus'd by the Blisters. I had but one Reason to doubt the contrary, and that was, he had little or no Strangury; but some Persons did assure me that they had known such, or even a more bloody sort of Water occasion'd by Blisters, even tho' there was no Strangury. I was willing therefore to hope the best, and so made no other Alteration in my Process than to direct a plentiful Use of Spirit of Vitriol.

What was order'd happen'd to succeed: We had no more of that sort of Water, either 

that Night, or the next Day, or the Morning following: But I was sent for in a great hurry that Day, viz. the 6th in the Afternoon, and found his Friends in the utmost Consternation, not only because it return'd, but because it began to increase upon them, and was pouring off in a very free manner; a Specimen of which I herewith send you.

It was necessary therefore to proceed in another Method, and I accordingly prescrib'd him Gum. Arabic. Oliban. & Pulv. Amyl. anass. Alumin. nup. gr. iv. to be taken sextis horis, in 3 or 4 Spoonfuls of a Mixture, 

had the desired Effect, and the Bloodiness of the Urine began to abate in about 10 or 12 Hours, and in 10 or 12 Hours more to go thoroughly off, so that by the next Day in the Evening the Urine was return'd to its natural State and Colour.

There was nothing farther observable in the course of this Case, except that the Distemper was of the Coherent Kind, and accordingly attended with many other dubious Symptoms likewise: For tho' it is generally thought that the Coherent Sort is not so formidable as the Confluent, yet, as Dr. Friend has judiciously observ'd, and Dr. Moreton before him, there is not so much difference between them, but they are almost always attended with much the same Appearances, and the same Fevers plainly, at the time of Maturation; for that the Danger does not arise so much from the Sort, as from the Number of the Pustules, which if it be great, there is the like Reason to be fearful of the Event, whether they flux, or whether they only cohere: All which notwithstanding this young Gentleman had the good Fortune to escape.

I have nothing farther to detain you with at present but one short Request, and that is, that you will be so good as to believe me with all the Respect and Esteem imaginable,

SIR, Your most Obedient, Faithful Servant, P. D.
June 23, 1745.

CASE the SECOND and THIRD. A SECOND LETTER to MARTIN FOLKES,Esq; PRESIDENT of the Royal Society.
In Vindication of the foregoing CASE. Together with Two other very remarkable Small-Pox Cases.

SIR,

I DID myself the Pleasure, some time since, to send you an Account of a young Gentleman who made Bloody Water in the Course of the Small-Pox, and yet recover'd, and you were so obliging as to give it a Place in a subsequent Transaction.

There is one Thing however which I could wish had not been omitted, and that is, that I sent you likewise a Sample of that Water, 

by which you might see whether it was, or was not, of that formidable Sort which I took it to be; but Dr. Mortimer tells me, there were several Gentlemen at the Society who had never had the Small-Pox, and that some of them might probably be very much afraid of it, and that it was not therefore thought adviseable that the said Sample shou'd be produc'd, and that it not having been produc'd before the Society he, through Inadvertency, did forget to take any Notice of it in the Publication.

The Case must therefore rest upon the bare Relation, as it does: All that I shall say farther in relation to it is, That it was a more thorough bloody Urine, and in a larger Quantity, than is ever occasion'd by Blisters, and entirely of that kind as seldom ever fails to be fatal: Et quamvis Remedia proposita sint vulgaria, hic Casus tamen observationem meruit propter Eventum non vulgarem, ex omnibus enim Variolis laborantibus quos mihi tota vita videre contigit, hic unicus fuit qui ex Fluxu sanguineo evaserit, sed in caeteris certum Mortis praesagium fuit, magna praesertim sanguinis copia affluente; as Riverius had the Good-fortune to be able to say before me, in a parallel Case which came before him, Centur. prima Observation:, — Observat. lxxi. — I call it a parallel Case, 

tho' This was a Fluxus Alvei, because the Prognostick is the same, whether the Effusion of Blood be per Alveum, vel per Vesicam.

What I have to offer to you now is a Case of a different Nature, but an Instance likewise of the Recovery of a Gentleman who had this Distemper in as terrible a manner as can well be conceiv'd, and that by a Regimen altogether as extraordinary.

It was one Mr. Prouse, Grandson to the learned and good Dr. Hooper, at that time Bishop of Bath and Wells, and the present worthy and steady Representative of his Country for the County of Somerset, and is taken from a Letter which was sent to a Friend of mine, from one of the nearest Relations that Mr. Prouse had, and who was with him during the whole time, viz. his Mother, dated October 31, 1719.

He had the Small-Pox came out upon him October 15, 1719, and on the 17th, i. e. the third Day, at Night, was seiz'd with a violent Shortness of Breath, which increas'd upon him the 18th in the Morning, so that he was in danger of being what they call throttled, had the Hiccups, rattled in his Throat, fetch'd his Breath double, grew senseless, look'd black and blue, was convuls'd all over, and lost one Pulse in four.

This till Eight at Night, during which time they pour'd in as much Wine, Brandy, and Spirits, as they cou'd, every Quarter of an Hour, but about that time he began to be in such a State as they cou'd not get in any more, and he fell into a sort of Slumber, out of which he wak'd in a very little time, and was something better: So from thence they continued him in the same Course, drinking nothing weaker than Strong Beer, and that with at least two or three Spoonfuls of Brandy, or Spirits, in every Draught of it, once every Hour, to the 27th, or the 13th after the Eruption: And what is very remarkable, if they let him lie any time an Hour or two extraordinary without these Liquors, he would grow light-headed, hot, and sick, but upon returning to them would grow cool and easy.

The Night between the 27th and the 28th was a very bad one, insomuch that it was as much as three Persons cou'd do to hold him in his Bed, but about Seven in the Morning he came entirely to himself, and was from that time thoroughly out of Danger; but during the Course that he was in before, which was from the 18th to the Morning of the 28th, besides his other Potables, which were all heighten'd and made strong with Drops or Spirits, he drank six and twenty 

Quarts and one Pint of Liquor, the smallest of which was Strong Beer, and the greatest part the strongest Wine that cou'd be got, besides a full Quart of Brandy.

All this while he did not know that it was the Small-Pox, but fancied it was a Surfeit which he had got by his having eaten too heartily of Pork, and was about 12 Years old when this happen'd.

The Eclat of this Recovery did a great deal of Credit to old Dr. Bettenson, under whose Care he was at the Bath, who, as he was a very eminent and good Physician, did every thing incumbent upon a Person of Skill and Integrity in a regular manner, previous to these terrible Appearances, but found himself, as he thought then, oblig'd to go a good deal out of the way, in order to support him, if possible, under the Violence of them, and was afterwards in a manner necessitated to go on with it by what is above related: And his Success in this Case, if I am rightly inform'd, encourag'd him to treat some of his future Small-Pox Patients, more particularly the present Earl Powlet, and a Brother or two of his, in much the same manner, and that without any sinister Event; but not being Master of those Cases, I can't say any thing more as to them.

Give me leave only to remark, That the Gentlemen of that County have, for the most part, good Stamina, and that it happens likewise very fortunately, especially in Cases of such extreme Danger as that of Mr. Prouse was, ut & sint, as Horace expresses it, dura Ilia, & ut, quicquid Veneni saeviat in praecordiis, Medici sinnt, qui iis auxiliatricem exporrigant manum.

I did not think to trouble you with any thing more at present, but another Small-Pox Case being lately come to my Hands, I was not willing to lose the Opportunity of communicating it.

It is the Case of a little Boy, Son to Mr. Richards, Member of Parliament for Bridport in Dorsetshire. He was inoculated about three Years ago, at the Age of about 3, and had the Small-Pox come out upon him to the number of 50 or 60, and they maturated and scabb'd, and went off in the same manner that that sort of Pock, which was a regular and distinct one, generally does: But about two Years afterwards, i. e. about a Year ago, he had the Small-Pox again, and there came out between 2 and 300, which maturated and scabb'd likewise, and went through the same Stages, and in the same manner that the former did, only he was 

worse before the Eruption, but when that was compleated had no manner of Disorder except too much of an Appetite, as is usual every now and then, in and after the Small-Pox.

This is authenticated to me by a Letter which I have from a learned and experienced Physician in those Parts, Dr. Brodrepp, who is likewise Grandfather to the Child, and attended him upon both Occasions: And, whatever may be said in evasion of other Gases, in which Persons that have been inoculated have had the Small-Pox afterwards, as That the Inoculation did not take place, There was no Eruption, at least no Variolous one, and the like, is certainly an Instance that All is not to be depended upon that is given out in favour of, or is expected from Inoculation, and that it is, by no means, an effectual Security from one's having the Small-Pox again.

 But, as it has been observed long since by the inimitable Author of Hudibrass,
Surety the Pleasure is as great
In being Cheated, as to Cheat.

or else it is impossible that Inoculation shou'd triumph so much as it is said† that it does over all its Opposers?

Addresses of this kind likewise ought not to be too long, I shall therefore say no more with relation to this Point at present, but hasten to a Conclusion, for fear that mine should not only be thought, but prove so, and am, with great Respect,

SIR, Your most Obedient, humble Servant, P. D,
June, 1743.

 POSTSCRIPT to the above Letter.

SINCE I wrote this, I have likewise had an Opportunity of being afresh satisfied of what is above related with respect to Mr. Prouse, with these further Particulars, viz.

That he was at first treated in the same manner that other People usually are, and put into a very temperate, if not too cool a Regimen.

That the Small-Pox, thereupon, did not come on, or rather struck in, and that in consequence thereof, he was brought into the Straits in which he was upon the third and fourth Days.

That, upon this, Dr. Bettenson told Mr. Prouse's Relations, of the good Effects which he had sometimes seen from a free Use of Strong and Spirituous Liquors, in his Practice among People in the Country, but did not care to venture upon it in a Person of such tender Years, and of such consequence as Mr. Prouse was; but that it was insisted upon that he shou'd do it, it being apparently a desperate Case, and there being nothing else seemingly to be done.

That they accordingly enter'd upon it, and went on with it, but more frequently than as it is above mention'd, being never able to discontinue the pouring in of them by as much as he cou'd take, for a Quarter of an Hour, without a sensible Detriment to him.

That the Strong Beer which he drank was some that his Grandfather had brewed when he was Dean of Canterbury, and brought with him from thence, which was then a matter of sixteen Years before, and of the Black or Noggish sort, of near 20 Bushels to the Hogshead.

That the good Event of this Process occasion'd a pretty general Run into a like one, in those Parts, during the time that the Small-Pox was so rife, and of so malignant a Sort, as it was that Winter and the Spring following, and that the Failure of it in some Instances was thought to be owing to too negligent an Attendance to it, or the not plying them duly and sufficiently with such-like Liquors.

And lastly, That it had been generally thought that Mr. Prouse's Cure, extraordinary as it was, could not well be ascrib'd to any thing else, but that a Physician of the first 

Rank, who, has been concern'd in his Family, seem'd to make light of it, and very frankly told them that he wou'd have done every whit as well if old Bettenson had order'd him to have been dragg'd through a Horse-pond: At which, I perceive, they were somewhat surpriz'd, and which is more indeed than I shou'd have thought, had it come from One of less Eminence in the Profession, or less critical upon the Practice of others than himself: But presume that he took it from a very good Way that they have of curing Fevers among the Tartars, and that is,
"When any one is seiz'd with a Fever, they take him by the Hair of the Head and shake him well for a little while, and swing him round and round, and then throw him into the Water; by which means a Turn is given to the Blood, and the Humours and Spirits are alter'd, and so the Fever is cur'd."

And thus much for this memorable Case.

CASE the FOURTH. BLOODY URINE in the SMALL-POX, And the Patient liv'd to the 20th Day.
Together with a short Account of the Small-Pox in general.

SINCE I wrote the foregoing Letters, &c. I have met with a Case of the same Nature with the First, in which there was Reason, as I thought, to hope for the same fortunate Event, and of which I will likewise give a brief Account, notwithstanding I was disappointed.

It was in a Servant of my own, a Lad of about 19 Years old, who was seiz'd with a violent Pain in his Back, which he imputed to his having help'd the Brewer's Servants in carrying down Drink; but which continuing, notwithstanding he was blooded and had a Plaister put upon it, and being attended likewise with a Pain in his Head (tho' not a great one) the Day following, I immediately apprehended that it was the Forerunner of the Small-Pox, and that of a bad Sort; I say of a 

bad Sort, because I have scarce ever known that Symptom to have preceded and to persist, but the Small-Pox has proved of a very dangerous Sort, and almost constantly fatal: Which is more than I remember to have been observ'd by any body that has hitherto treated concerning this Distemper.

The Eruption ensued, i. e. began to shew itself, on the third Day, and Bloody Water upon the fourth from that, or the seventh from the Invasion, and continued that and the next Day, and great part of the Day following; and there were other Symptoms, viz. a Delirium and Diarrhoea, and great Restlesness and Inquietude, which attended him likewise from just before the Eruption to almost that time, notwithstanding he had been Blooded again, and had a Blister inter Scapulas, and taken all proper temperate Restringents the whole while.

What was farther remarkable in this Case is, that he went on pretty tolerably for Number and Sort, &c. after this until the fifteenth Day, but was then seiz'd with a sudden Deliquium, and in such a State that it was almost impracticable to get any thing down, and he was seemingly expiring. They made a shift however to get down, every now and then, a Spoonful or two of Lac Ammoniac and Tinctura Croci, with some Serpentaria in it, 

and a couple of Blisters were applied infra Cubitos, by means of which he came to himself, and was likely enough to live the next Morning; and continuing so that Day, which was the Sixteenth from the Eruption, and which has been observ'd to be the latest that any One has been known to survive who ever made such dreadful Water; and continuing so likewise with not much of a Fever, and something of an Appetite, and two or three Stools a Day, and good Apprehensions for himself, for two Days more, I cannot but think there was Reason to hope he might have done well: But unluckily for him, the Fever rose upon him again the third time, to a very high degree, the next Day in the Evening, and threw every thing into Confusion, and he died upon the 19th Day of December last, having had the Small-Pox come out upon him the 30th of the Month before.

SECT. II.

AS I am upon Small-Pox Cases, it will not be unacceptable, I hope, if I add something concerning that Distemper in general, especially as it is partly taken from the Adversaria of that Learned Gentleman who is mention'd in the Preface, and to whom the Reader will be further oblig'd in most of the subsequent Cases.

The Small-Pox is a contagious Distemper, and as terrible as any of them, very many dying of it, more particularly when it is accompanied, as it generally is, with a Fever of a dangerous Kind.

This, when they are many, or of the Flux, or Confluent Sort; on the contrary, when the Patient has but a few, and the Fever ceases upon the Eruption, no Disease is more favourable, and you may sometimes meet them walking about their Affairs, with the Small-Pox in their Faces, in the open Streets of London.

No Disease likewise in which there is more of a Crisis than in the Small-Pox; for by the fourth Day, at furthest, after the Invasion, the Eruption is evident; by the seventh it is perfected, or all are come out; by the eleventh they dry away, or turn into Scabs; and by 

the fourteenth they fall off; tho' in the Flux Sort they are often slower, and some die after the fourteenth, nay on the seventeenth, and twentieth Days, altho' few have Strength enough to hold out so long.

A Fever, as has been said, generally joined with the Small-Pox, and when it ceases not upon the Eruption, apt however for some Days after it to be more remiss: but on the seventh from the Eruption it increases again, and returns with some Violence; and this is what is generally called the Second Fever, and occasions the Danger, which continues for some Days: Nay in the Flux Sort some are so unfortunate as to have a third Fever seven Days after the second, in which Case very few escape.

The Small-Pox favourable,
Quae cito maturae, quae erumpunt Febre remissa,
Rubrae, albae, paucae, nullae nigrore notatae;

Et ubi
Libera vox, facilis spiratio, non sitis ingens;

Those on the contrary unfavourable, and for the most part mortal where there is
Mictus sanguineus, fluxusve, Angina, Phrenitis;

The greatest Danger, as has been said before, mostly from the Fever, upon which account Dr. Browne is of Opinion, that if that cou'd be respited there wou'd not near so many die of this Disease, and was confirm'd in this Opinion from his own Experience, upon trying of the Bark, both in the first Fever which brings them out, and in the second when they begin to dry and shou'd go away, and gives us some of the Instances, one of which, relating to its Efficacy in the Secondary Fever, I shall here set down, and may be called, 


The Fifth Case.

Mr. Dormer, who lodg'd then in Pall-Mall, had a very ill Sort of Small-Pox, which ran all together, and covered most of the Superficies of his Skin, both in Face and Body, and was in danger from the Beginning. When the time came that they shou'd dry away, and the second Fever increas'd upon him, they stood like a Quagmire all about him, and wou'd advance no further, notwithstanding many powerful Remedies were given 

him. In this difficult Case the Doctor delayed no longer, but gave him a Drachm of the Bark in Substance, and repeated it every six Hours at furthest, till he had taken about an Ounce and an half of it. His Nights were so bad before, notwithstanding many quieting Remedies which he had taken, that each of them, as it was fear'd, wou'd be his last; but the first Night after he began with the Bark was quieter, and the Small-Pox on both Sides of his Face began to dry; the second Night his Face was all dried, and some of his Body advanc'd very much, and after the third Night all the Symptoms abated, and he seem'd to be in great Safety, and very suddenly recover'd to the great Joy of all his numerous Friends.

The Doctor's general Process as to this Distemper upon other Occasions, much the same as has been ever since, except as to Bleeding, which he restrains to a Plethoric Habit, and the Time before the Eruption; tho' at the same time he informs us, that at Paris they let them Blood any Day after the Appearance, but says this is not practis'd here in England; and excepting likewise as to Blisters, which he does not so much as advise the Use of, or make any mention of in the whole Country, or in any State of the Disease, and which I am the more surprized at, because 

he takes great Notice of them, and advises one at least to be kept continually open and running during the whole course of the malady, in Malignant and Pestilential Fevers, and says that the great Use of them came first to be known during the Pestilential Constitution, which was Anno 1664 and 1665, and had continued ever since.

The rest of his Process, Pectoral Drinks, Lambatives, and Posset-Drink, with Tares in it in case that the Lungs, and Gargles and Mucilages in case that the Throat is affected, together with Diascordium, Theriaca, or Philonium, in case of a Looseness, and an Ounce of Diacodium every Night in case of Inquietude; and, if the Small-Pox prove long lasting, some temperate Cordial, and to supply the Spirits often with a Draught of it, in case of Faintness, and thorough Purging when the Small-Pox is well off, and the Patient fit for it.

There is one thing further which the Doctor takes notice of, and that is, that many Waters, Oils and Unguents, or Liniments, are frequently made use of, in order to preserve the Face, after the Small-Pox; all which he thinks altogether useless, if not hurtful; and that a little Flower, or white Starch, well dried, and shaken upon the Face, is preferable to them all. Nay, if you let nothing 

that is moist, or greasy, touch the Face for fifteen Days, the Face, he says, will scarce be red, at least not so red as it will otherwise be; and if for a long while after you forbear to wash it, it will be the better, and the most that you need to do is to breathe upon a warm Handkerchief, and to wipe your Face with it.

CASE the SIXTH. A general Decrepitacy from the GOUT. Cur'd by Bathing, and Drinking of the Bath-Waters. Anno Domini 1691 and 1692.

MR. Long, of Downeside, in the Parish of Shepton Mallet, in the County of Somerset, of about 49 Years of Age, was seiz'd with the Gout about 14 Years before, i. e. before the Year 91, and for the three Years immediately preceding, was never without great Pains a Month together in the whole Year, the Pains rambling from Part to Part, and upon Abatement leaving a Numbness over the whole Body. In consequence of this likewise, the Joints of his Fingers became crooked and inflexible; the Patella of his right Knee fix'd; his Posture decrepit, and quite double, with extreme Pain in his Hips and Small of the Back; the Muscles and Joints of his Thighs, Legs, Ancles, and Feet, motionless, so that he was carried about from Place to Place, not able to put the least 

Stress upon the Ground; his Stomach, lost; his thirst, unquenchable; his Face meagre, pale and yellow; the Hair of his Head, gray, and the whole Habit of his Body, emaciated to Skin and Bones. To these Afflictions were frequently added, terrible Fits of the Stone, to which sort of Concretions the Entrails of his Body were so much dispos'd, that after six Weeks use of the Bath Waters, leaving his Waters, by chance, for seven Days, the Urinal was crusted all over with a perfect hard Stone like a Pumice, thicker than a Crown-piece.

This was his Case when he began to drink the Bath Waters at the End of April, 1691; and he drank them hot in the Morning, and cold at Meals; and in a little time was reconciled to them for his constant Drink, without Desire of any other. In a Week's time his Stomach came, and his Thirst abated; and after a Month's constantly Drinking, and Bathing every other Day a little while, only to stretch his Joints, it gave him perfect Ease from Pain.

The 28th of May he return'd home, and carried some of the Waters along with him, and sent for them constantly once a Week, using them for his ordinary Drink, and sometimes drinking them warm in the Morning for a Stool or two, as Occasion required, and 

they pass'd very well, but not so effectually as upon the Place. This Course continued till the End of August 1691, when he came to the Bath again, Drinking and Bathing as at the first, till the Middle of October, with increasing Success; but towards that time he went home again, and sent and continued to use the Waters as before.

Between Allhallowtide and Christmas the Gray Hairs began to fall off, and new ones succeeded; and by Candlemas they were all gone, and a brown, curling Hair came in their place, such as he had when he was about 20, growing so fast, that he was oblig'd to cut above an Inch a Month, and still growing thicker and fresher, so that he had a Head of Hair like a Wig, without a gray one in it.

This encourag'd him to quit his own House, and come and take a House at the Bath, and to renew and pursue the above Method very diligently, and it was accordingly attended with daily Amendment, insomuch that in the Summer, 1692, his Toe-Nails, which before were hard, rugged, and scaly, were thrust off by some that were new, fresh, and smooth; his Arms were strengthen'd; his Legs plump'd out, and his Feet cou'd bear a strait pair of Shoes; and he that before cou'd not lay the least Stress upon them, cou'd then 

bear to stamp upon the Ground, and that forcibly, and without the least Regret, and found his Strength, as he had done his Decay, still increasing upwards, so that he could stand almost upright without any Pain.

He acquired likewise a fleshy Habit of Body, and a ruddy and plump Face, and a lively vigorous Eye, and cou'd bend his Knees, and did not want other Effects or Powers of Youth: Nor had he any Fit of the Gout to lay him up, nor the least Touch of the Stone, or any Sharpness of Urine, after he was once well enter'd into drinking of the Bath-Waters.

This Case is related, among a great many others, by Dr. Peirce in his Memoirs of the Bath, Page 334, &c. but neither so clearly, nor so fully as above; upon which account I take the liberty to publish it, and think that it is so remarkable and well-told a Case that it very well deserves the Notice which is taken of it; and there is thus much farther remarkable in it, viz. that the Cure seems to be, in a great measure, owing to the Bathing, as well as Drinking of the Waters, tho' it is now thought to be extremely prejudicial, and consequently prohibited to all who are in any manner afflicted with the GOUT.

CASE the SEVENTH. The Case of the Marquis of Dorchester.
A large Quantity of Opium taken through a Mistake.

HENRY, Marquis of Dorchester, Son to the Earl of Kingston, Lieutenant-General of his Majesty King Charles I. his Forces, within the Counties of Lincoln, Rutland, &c. a great Lover of Learning, and a great Lover of learned Men, (and to whom the College of Physicians is oblig'd for a valuable Collection of Books, which he purchas'd at the Expence of some thousand Pounds, and gave to the College) had a Cabinet of Choice Remedies, as was usual with Great Persons, and in all great Families at that time, and among the rest a Metalline Substance, which look'd like Regulus of Antimony, but being in Wine, or any other Liquor, was not Vomitive but Sudorifick.

He had likewise a well-compounded Cordial Electuary, of which he us'd to take about the Quantity of a Walnut every Morning, and likewise always kept a celebrated 

Extract, then much in use, and call'd Extractum Cardiac. Magistrale, the seventh Part of which was Extract of, or purified Opium, and of which he us'd also to give his Servants, or ethers that wanted it, every now and then, a few Grains.

One Morning, as a Servant of his was passing through, his Bed-chamber, he call'd to her to reach him the Gallypot in which the Cordial Electuary was, out of his Closet, but she through mistake brought him the Pot of the Extract, and of which, as it happen'd, there were four Ounces, and he immediately took six Drachms of it, as appear'd upon weighing of what remained afterwards; so that what he took contain'd about two Scruples and an half, or fifty Grains of pure Opium.

After this he slept four Hours, viz. from Eight to Twelve, before his Servants perceived any thing of the Mistake, or attempted to wake him; but then they could not, tho' they did what they could, and therefore sent immediately from Highgate, where his Lordship then was, to Dr. Browne and Sir John Micklethwaite to come and attend him.

Sir John Micklethwaite being abroad, Dr. Browne prescrib'd divers Things, and had them made up ready, and a little while afterwards they met with Sir John, and by Five 

in the Evening they were both of them with my Lord, at his House in Highgate. His Servants in the mean time had been able to take him up, and put on his Cloaths, and to support and assist him to walk about his Chamber, and he was sometimes able to open his Eyes, and to answer to what was spoken, but fell asleep again presently, and they were not able to keep him awake a Quarter of a Minute with all their Striving, calling upon him, giving him provoking Language, nor any thing else that they cou'd do.

He was therefore let Blood directly, and that plentifully, and then took Infusion. Croci Metallor. iss, and after that Vitrioli albi i, twice, but cou'd not vomit, neither did he ever vomit in the whole course of his Life: However the Medicines work'd downwards, and he had a Stool in about an Hour's time, and they then proceeded to give him a Draught of Decoct. Senn. iv, with two Ounces of Syrupus de Spina, and repeated the same sort of Medicines every two or three Hours afterwards, and Sir John Micklethwait seeing little or no Alteration for the better, return'd to London about Nine at Night, bewailing the apparent Loss of so great a Man, so good a Friend, and so kind a Master; but Dr. Browne continued with him, and still to give what Assistance he cou'd, and about Midnight order'd my Lord

to be put to Bed, and to be suffered to sleep without those frequent Interruptions which had been hitherto given him.

The Purging Draughts continued to work plentifully, and as soon as the Day began to appear, the Doctor walk'd down into the Garden to refresh himself with the cool Air of the Morning, giving Orders to be call'd in half an Hour, or upon any Alteration which might happen to his Lordship, and about that time Notice was brought him that my Lord seem'd to be more sensible, and was awake; upon which the Doctor went in again, and found his Pulse not quite so high as it had been before, and gave him a Cordial Draught, with 15 Drops of Spiritus Salis Armoniaci in it.

My Lord being now not so desirous of Sleep as before, call'd for his Chaplain to read to him, and in half an Hour more his Head was clear, and he seem'd to be totally recover'd, and desired to see what had been order'd for him, and spoke of the Praescriptions with a great deal of Candour and Reason, and Skill and Judgment. And thus, in the space of less than twenty-four Hours from the Time of the taking it, the Narcotick, or whatever other noxious Quality there may be in too large a Quantity of Opium, was master'd and totally remedied.

This Case is without a Date, but what I have likewise among Dr. Browne's Adversaria, and a clear Instance of his Abilities, and of the Justice with which my Lord Marquis was pleas'd to speak of him in his Profession, Bleeding, Vomiting, and Purging, or one, or more, if not All of them, being certainly the most effectual, if not the unice necessaria upon all such Occasions: Upon which account I have often wonder'd that so general a Notice only is taken of them, that Acid Medicines and Lixivial Salts are put upon an equal foot of Efficacy with them, in a celebrated Treatise upon the Subject of Poisons, with which the World has been long oblig'd, and lately reoblig'd. But multiplicity of Business, greater Concerns, and a Non vacat pro rebus exiguis, cannot but prevent Persons of Eminence from being so particularly instructive as they might otherwise be, and what is said in relation to it, in each of the Editions, seems to be intended rather for Hints of all that is proper in general, than to point out what may be more particularly necessary, and is principally to be depended upon on such Occasions.

The said Marquis of Dorchester was educated at Emanuel-College in Cambridge, and 

became afterwards a hard Student, studying, as it is said, for the most part, ten or twelve Hours a Day, and applying himself to the Study of the Fathers, and Schoolmen, and Casuists, and of the Canon and Civil Law; as likewise of the Common Law, and was accordingly admitted a Bencher of Grays-Inn, Anno Dom. 1642, but about seven Years afterwards, when he was about 43 Years old, viz. in the Year 1649, he betook himself to the Study of Physick and Anatomy, and was admitted to be a Fellow of the College of Physcians in 1658, and became a Credit and Ornament to it, or, as Tony Wood expresses it, their Pride and Glory, and was a great Lover of the whole Society, and more particularly of Dr. Browne, who was the Person whom he consulted principally, and intrusted likewise as to the Purchase of such Books as were necessary for compleating of his Library, for the future Service and Benefit of the College. He was born Anno Dom. 1606, and died at his own House in Charter-House Yard, Decemb. 8, 1680, aged 74 Years.

CASE the EIGHTH. A Suppression of Urine, from the Stone in the Kidneys, Cur'd by a large Quantity of Soap.

MR. Hales, Brother to Sir Edward Hales of Kent, had Stones in both Kidneys, and it so happen'd, that the Stones on each side descended together, and stopp'd, or plugg'd up both the Ureters in such a manner, that he labour'd under a total Suppression of Urine for twenty Days together. Dr. Browne visited him from the Beginning of it, and gave him Glysters and Purges, and order'd him to be bloodedseveral times, and as often as he could bear it for the Pain, to go from his Brother's Chambers in the Temple, where he lodg'd, as far as to Hyde-Park in a Coach: He gave him Vomits likewise, especially if ever he began to be drowsy, which frequently happen'd, and they were of Vitriol. alb. Oxymel of Squills, and Vin. Benedictum, as his Purges were of Decoct. Sennae & Mannae, with Syrup of Buckthorn and Julep, and Resin of Julep, and Aloes, and Scammony, which the Doctor gave 

chiefly because he hop'd they wou'd prove Hydragogues, and help to carry off the Serous Parts of the Blood, lest they shou'd otherwise break in upon, and drown the Brain.

These and other Medicines were given, scarce any thing being omitted that cou'd any ways contribute either to the Support of him, or to the suppling of the Passages, or the making a Discharge of the Stone, in all respects, more easy; notwithstanding which there was no Relief, only that he was kept still alive.

At length the Doctor thought of Castile Soap, and gave him not a little, but from two or three Drachms to an Ounce, and an Ounce and an half, and to two and more Ounces at a time, dissolv'd in Water, 'till he had taken two Pounds of it, and at last there came away a Stuff, and some Water followed.—This Stuff was separated, as the Doctor imagines, from the Inside of the Ureter, and there came away a large Stone along with it, and wrapt up in it, besides several other small ones, and Dirt and Skin, and the gangren'd Membrane, and after that a foul and nasty Urine, and then, viz. the next Day in the Morning, a great Quantity of Water.—What he took afterwards was Terebinthina Veneta, and other soft and gentle Medicines of the same Tendency, and all was well.

This is a remarkable Account of a very happy Effect from the Use of Soap, and an Instance how free it may be made with, even to a Degree which is almost incredible. But then it must be consider'd, that this was likewise an almost gone Case, and of extreme Exigence: Every thing else, in a manner, had been tried, and there was no other Chance for his Survival. In which sort of Cases it is not only the Judgment, but warrantable, to give things of the greatest Efficacy, and that, not only in the common trifling Way and Doses, but to the utmost Stretch that either the Patient can bear, or the Medicine shall be found not to be going beyond the anceps Remedium.

It is to be observed likewise, that the Effect which this Medicine had, was merely to bring away the Stuff, Stone, &c. Soap, more particularly that of Castile, being, as Dr. Browne (immediately previous to this Case) has observ'd, an excellent Diuretick; the Subtilty of its Parts, and the Activity and Asperity of its Salts, soften'd by means of their Union with an Oil, admirably qualifying it to stimulate and deterge, as well as to relax the Urinary Passages, and consequently to facilitate the Exclusion of any thing that wants to pass off that way.

How far it is capable of being improv'd into further Excellencies, and to become a Lithontriptick,

or possess'd of the Virtue to break or dissolve the Stone in a human Body, I won't pretend to determine. Dr. Browne, tho' he has mention'd several things which are thought to be so, does not seem to think that any thing is really so, or much to be relied upon for any such Purpose: And Tulpius, that faithful Observer, says,
"Nihil Medicis frequentius in ore quam Medicamentum Calculos frangens; at vide fis arenosos & molles duntaxat intelligas; Silices quippe ut vix comminuunt Mallei, sic profecto multo minus acris aliquis humor, qui fortassis aptior foret exedendis tenuibus Vesicae tunicis quam praeduris Lapidibus."
—Vide Tulpii Observationes, Lib. IV. Cap. 37. The rest of which, because it is not altogether foreign to the present Purpose, I shall take the liberty to subjoin immediately after the present Case.

But I forget — Physick is an ample Field, and there ever have been, and ever will be Opportunities of adding to, or retrenching from, and making some Improvements or Alterations or other in Medicine; and there have ever likewise been some who have been Discreet enough to reserve the Pleasure of the Knowledge of them to themselves, altho' at the same time they have never fail'd to be so Publick-spirited as to acquaint the World, of 

whom, and where they were to be had; and it is certainly an Argument of a refined and understanding Age there either are any New Lights struck out in any Branch of Science,

 
IV. A Treatise of the Small-Pox: In Two Parts. Part I. Containing a Description both of the distinct and confluent Kind, when they proceed regularly; and of the curative Indications in every Period, and the Methods of managing variolous Particles, as to Heat and Cold, Cloathing and Diet, Medicines, &c. Also an Account of the incidental Symptoms, as to their Causes and Effects; and the Indications of Cure, and the proper Remedies, in reference to each of them. Likewise Answers to the Arguments of the most celebrated Physicians for Bleeding in this Disease; and then Proofs of a Probability of curing it in the febrile State, so as to prevent the Eruption, and other After-periods, and a Method likely to effect it; which, if effectual, may preserve Persons from having this Distemper. Part II. Exhibiting Histories of Cases, in which this Disease, and its various Symptoms, are exemplified. Also a Dissertation on the Management of young Children under it, and a Method of external Remedies for those who will not take internal Medicines; and then some practical Aphorisms deduced from the Histories. By Theophilus Lobb, M. D. F. R. S. and Fellow of the College of Physicians. The Second Edition, inlarged and corrected.